The Project Gutenberg eBook of Transuranic, by Edmond Hamilton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Transuranic

Author: Edmond Hamilton

Illustrator: Astarita

Release Date: January 7, 2023 [eBook #69729]

Language: English

Produced by: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net.

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSURANIC ***





                              TRANSURANIC

                     A Novelet By EDMOND HAMILTON

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                Thrilling Wonder Stories February 1948.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                               CHAPTER I

                        _Unexpected Discovery_


It was Andersen's queer talk that marked the beginning of it for
us. Of course, that wasn't the real beginning. I suppose you might
say it really started when Becquerel first puzzled over his fogged
photographic plates. But to us, Andersen's premonitions were the start.

We called him the "Melancholy Dane." But that was just a joke, though
his tall, cadaverous appearance fitted it. He wasn't really a gloomy
sort, and was a first-class nuclear chemist. That was why he surprised
us with what he said at dinner that night.

The talk had been shop talk, of course it nearly always was that, at
Transuranic Station. Zarias had been triumphant about the way that
Element Number 144 was going through the "canyons."

"Fifty new transuranic elements, not counting the gaps!" he exulted.
"And I'm sure One-forty-four will be at least semi-stable."

Andersen spoke, then.

"I have a feeling that what we are doing here is against the cosmic
scheme," he said in his slow English.

Zarias goggled. He was a fat, bald and irreverent Greek, a brilliant
physicist with about as much mysticism as a doorknob.

"Cosmic scheme?" he repeated. "What are you talking about?"

Andersen's sallow face flushed a little as he saw that we were all
looking at him curiously.

"I mean," he said hesitantly, "that all these transuranic elements
we're creating here are purely man-made. Nothing like them ever existed
in the natural cosmos. They're an artificial intrusion, a brand-new
order of matter that doesn't rightly belong in our universe at all."

Zarias snorted. "My dear Dane, I'd advise you to consult our friend
Varez on the state of your psyche."

I saw that Andersen was a little hurt. "He's only joking, Nils," I put
in.

Zarias swore. "I am not joking, Drummond. When a serious scientist
starts going mystic, it's time he had his complexes checked."

"Come, come, gentlemen," said Burris, in his mocking way. "We must
remember not to get on one another's nerves!"

We all laughed at that, for it was spoken in the Director's pompous
manner, and recalled the best joke we had at Transuranic Station. It
was a worn-out joke, but still welcome in our isolation and monotony.

Now please don't misunderstand me. I'm not going to strike that "Ah,
the loneliness of it all!" pose. The first atomic scientists who served
at Transuranic Station pretty well overdid that pose for the benefit of
an admiring world. Personally, it always made me sick.

       *       *       *       *       *

But it _was_ a lonely environment; there's no getting away from
that. Thirty scientists and technicians, twenty-one of them men and
nine of them women, doing a six-month stretch in this complex tomb of
concrete and metal sunk in the face of the Moon.

When we had first arrived to take over Transuranic Station, we had been
solemnly admonished by Cubbison, our Director.

"The most important thing of all," he told us, "is not to get on one
another's nerves."

The joke of that was that Cubbison himself was the only man who got on
everybody's nerves. Doctor Walter Cubbison--he always insisted on the
"Doctor"--was as fine a specimen of scientific bureaucrat as you'd want
to see. He had done good research back in the 1950's but that wasn't
what had wangled the Commission on Atomic Energy into making him head
of Transuranic Station. It was his political ability, we all knew.

"There must be no emotional obstacles to our work," he had adjured us.
"All such problems must be submitted to our able psychologist, Doctor
Varez."

Well, despite Cubbison's worry over our nerves, we hadn't had to bother
Varez yet. We were too well-adjusted a lot for that. But now Nils
Andersen seemed to have gone off the deep end, a little.

He had given me something to think about, though. It had never occurred
to me that Transuranic Station was an outpost of unprecedented defiance
of normality. But in a way, it was.

It's not easy to explain to laymen. It's all very well to write a
"Primer of the Atom," but you just can't make nuclear physics as easy
to understand as a ball game. But I'll try to explain what Andersen
meant.

There were, until the early 1940's, ninety-two elements in nature. They
ran from hydrogen up to uranium, from atomic Number One to Ninety-two.
Those elements made up everything in nature. Mendelieff had neatly
arranged them in his periodic table and there just weren't any more.

Then they got to bombarding uranium with neutrons to create the uranium
fission on which atomic energy is based. And they found that one
isotope of uranium would absorb a neutron and then eject an electron.
That stepped up its atomic number, the number of charges in its
nucleus, from ninety-two to ninety-three. And that meant it wasn't
uranium any longer but a brand-new element, neptunium.

Neptunium was boosted up naturally by the same process to atomic
Number Ninety-four, and so we had plutonium. And then in 1946 the
University of California scientists started the job of trying to add
carbon, Number Six, to uranium, to make another new element--Number
Ninety-eight.

You see what had happened? For the first time in history, the "normal"
range of ninety-two elements had been extended. New elements,
transuranic elements, had been created such as had never appeared at
all naturally. They were a totally artificial new kind of matter.

Of course, the atomic physicists didn't stop there. They kept up the
boosting process to create more new transuranic elements. By 1960 they
had run the transuranic elements clear up to Number One-twenty-eight.
Of course, many of them were unstable and could be kept in existence
only under special conditions. And after the Cambridge disaster, the
Commission got a little nervous about the whole business.

That's why they had established Transuranic Station up here on the Moon
where a blow-up wouldn't harm anybody--except scientists. The rocket
boys had got to the Moon before 1951 and had found it wasn't good for
much else but such a station. So it had been built here on the face of
the flat Mare Imbrium.

The "Dome" was what we called the central living quarters. For safety
in emergency it had forty-foot walls that could stop any radiation ever
heard of. The labs were grouped loosely around it like planets around
a sun, connected by sealed underground tunnels. The big atomic piles
and separation "canyons" ran off underground, with full remote-control
facilities.

The whole place was Earth-conditioned, with magnetized floors that
approximated normal gravity when we wore our steel-soled shoes. Even
so, men and women couldn't take more than six months of it without
organic trouble. We were the second shift of scientists to work at the
Station.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had begun where the first shift left off, at transuranic element
Number One-thirty-six. And with Zarias sparking the work, we had run
the new elements up to a hundred and forty-four, the last one just
being separated now. And it looked as though we're now working into a
more stable series of elements.

That's why Andersen irked me a little with his talk of these new
elements being a challenge to the normal cosmos.

"Everything man does is a challenge like that," I told him next day in
his lab. "The first time he smelted iron or sent a radio message, it
was the same."

Andersen shook his head. "Not quite the same, Drummond. Iron and
electromagnetic vibrations always existed in Nature. We just used them.
But these transuranic elements--they _never_ existed before."

Before I could argue further, the inter-phone across his lab squawked
in Zarias' voice.

"Drummond! Andersen! Come over here and I'll show you something!"

We went through the tunnels in a hurry, to Main Physics lab. There were
already a half-dozen others there--Marie Laurent, Burris, Varez and
others.

"Take a look at the panel of Chamber N!" Zarias yelled at us.

The remote-controls that handled all the machinery in the "canyons" and
buried chambers outside the labs were concentrated on one wall of Main
Physics lab. There was a panel of registering gauges and a televisor
screen above the controls of each distant chamber.

We looked in the screen first. In Chamber N was a roughly oval mass of
tawny metal that was a foot across.

"Element One-forty-four, huh?" I said to Zarias. "You've sure separated
a lot of it."

"Look at those radiation gauges!" he yelped. "The gauges, not the
screen!"

We looked, and were stunned. The gauges showed that radiation was
pouring out _through_ the walls of Chamber N.

"Holy cats!" yelled Burris. "Chamber N is leaking radiation like a
sieve!"

"Impossible!" exclaimed Marie Laurent, blue eyes stunned. "Those walls
should hold everything from Alpha to neutrons! Let me check it!"

When she and Burris, our two radiation experts, finished that check,
they looked more dazed than before. Marie wiped back a disorderly lock
of her heavy dull-blond hair, in a stunned way.

"That radiation from Element One-forty-four is something completely
new!" she said incredulously. "It's way down in the forty-fourth minus
octave, and it's going through those ray-proof walls like paper!"

Zarias began to swear. He swore in Greek, and he hardly ever did that.
I knew then how badly upset he was.

"We've stumbled onto something new, and maybe it's bad and maybe it's
good, but it's new!" he finished. "A new type of radiation!"

All this time, Andersen had stood behind me staring into the visor of
Chamber N in a blank sort of way. In our excitement, we hadn't paid him
any attention. But now as we stood dazed and silent, he spoke. He spoke
in a queer, halting way, his eyes fixed on the televisor screen.

"We must bring that mass of One-forty-four and a lot of the other
transuranic elements out of the chambers, into this lab," he said.

Burris uttered a yelp. "Are you crazy? That new ray might induce enough
unpredictable activity in the other elements to trigger a big fission!"

Andersen just looked at him vaguely. "We must do that," he murmured.
"It has been born, but It is still weak. We must help It grow stronger,
or It will die."

There was a sick silence, then. And in it, all the excitement of our
unexpected discovery drained right out of us.




                              CHAPTER II

                         _An Alien Intrusion_


We knew what had happened, all right. It happened to three of the first
shift of scientists at Transuranic Station. They had cracked up badly,
and that's why we had a psychologist with our shift.

I realized now we should have known it the way Andersen had talked the
night before. Of course, he had seemed normal then. But now his dazed,
earnest look and halting, crazy talk meant just one thing.

Varez went to him and spoke quietly. "Perhaps you are right, Nils. Will
you come and talk it over with me?"

Andersen looked at him earnestly. "You understand, Ramon? It needs
strength. We must help It."

"I understand a little," said Varez, taking the Dane's arm. He walked
with him toward the door. "I want you to explain it to me."

And then Varez' good work was nearly undone by Doctor Cubbison. He
stood in the door, and his high, rasping voice complained.

"Really, Doctor Andersen, I am surprised at your absurd suggestion! I
really feel I must report this to the Commission."

"That will be enough," said Varez in his soft voice, and yet there was
something in it that shut Cubbison up at once.

But when Varez and Andersen had gone, Cubbison started again.

"This new radiation must be shielded off at once!" he fussed. "See to
it immediately, Doctor Laurent! I'll report to New York."

It was like him, that order. It was like him to order Marie to devise
instantly a shield for a radiation that no one before had dreamed to
exist. But she silently started making capture cross-section tests of
various shielding materials, by the remote-control.

By that "evening"--we kept Earth time at the Station--the radiation
from Element One-forty-four was still a mystery. It was still leaking
out of that chamber, though of course even it couldn't enter the Dome.
Marie and Burris had been making their capture cross-sections all day.

Zarias was badly upset, at dinner that night in the Dome. He was upset
because this new radiation had suddenly cut the ground from under all
the physics he knew so well.

"We're exactly where the Curies and Rutherford were fifty years ago!"
he kept saying. "We're on the brink of unexplored territory!"

Marie Laurent was silent at dinner, and afterward I saw her go up
the stair to the lookout. I followed and found her gazing out of the
filter-windows at the glaring, ghastly desert of the Mare Imbrium over
which swung the dull green shield of Earth.

They say that when a man reports for duty at Transuranic Station he
spends his whole first day peering raptly from the lookout, and then
never goes up there again. It's nearly the truth--the novelty of being
on the Moon wears off fast, when nothing out there ever changes.

Marie turned around and smiled at me. "You might have waited long
enough to make your coming look casual, Frank."

"Why the devil should I?" I told her. "Everyone in the Station knows
how I chase you."

She didn't object when I kissed her. I liked the cool firmness of her
lips, and the warm firmness of her body in my arms, and the way her
disorderly lock of dull-blond hair fell across her forehead.

She wasn't pretty. Her mouth was too wide and her face had a little too
much strength. No, she wasn't pretty--but she was beautiful.

She pushed me away. "I'm getting to like that a little too much, Frank."

"I wish you'd take me seriously," I complained.

She laughed. "Be reasonable! I'm twenty-nine years old to your
twenty-seven, I'm a very plain girl, and we don't know each other at
all. It's just propinquity."

I was annoyed because she always fended me off that way. But before I
could argue, we heard a step on the stair. It was Varez who came up
into the lookout. He smiled at us in his quiet way. He was a dark,
soft-spoken young Costa Rican whom we all liked.

"Just the man I want to see," I said. "I have an emotional problem.
It's Marie."

"What can I do about that, Drummond?" he countered.

Marie laughed. "Probably Frank wants you to order me to spend a
week-end with him, when we return to Earth."

"You French all have evil minds," I told her. And then asked Varez,
"Tell her she has to marry me."

Varez laughed softly. "Transuranic Station is like heaven in only one
way--there is no giving in marriage. I can't help you, Drummond."

       *       *       *       *       *

It struck me suddenly that he looked tired and depressed.

"What about Nils?" I asked. "Is he all right now?"

"I don't know," murmured the psychologist.

He peered out of the window at the terminator creeping like a tide of
darkness across the ghastly lunar plain. In the Earthshine, distant
craters fanged the star-specked sky.

"Can you tell us what Andersen meant by his talk in the lab?" Marie
asked him soberly.

Varez turned slowly. "It's all rather baffling. He talked at first only
of something called 'It'. It had been born and It must grow. It needed
strength."

He frowned. "When I tried to probe deeper, I just couldn't get
anywhere. I tried hypnosis, but it didn't work. That amazed me, for
Andersen seemed a susceptible type. I finally gave him a sedative and
left him to sleep."

Marie was silent a moment. "Do you think there could be any
connection--"

She was interrupted by feet pounding up the little steel stair. It was
Carew, the gangling English youngster who was Zarias' assistant, who
burst into the lookout. He looked upset.

"Doctor Varez, I thought I ought to tell you! I just saw Doctor
Andersen going into Main Physics lab! Of course it's none of my
business, but I heard about what happened today, and he looked so queer
and dazed!"

All three of us were startled.

"We'd better get hold of him at once!" exclaimed Varez.

We ran down the stair, and Burris and Mathers, the chief mathematician
of the Station, joined us as we hurried across the Dome to the main
tunnel into the labs. Burris' face was taut as he ran.

"That cracked idea of his of bringing a lot of the transuranic elements
together--if he tried that--"

"This way!" yelled Zarias, his voice from ahead of us sounding
strangled. "Hurry!"

We burst into the big Main Physics lab. The first thing we saw was
Zarias scrambling to his feet by one wall. His face was deathly white
and he had blood on his forehead.

Across the big lab, Andersen was working like a madman with the
remote-controls by which the transuranic elements could be mechanically
brought from their safety chambers into the lab. The Dane had a blank,
unseeing look on his face as he yanked conveyor-switches one after
another.

Burris yelled as we ran forward. I heard the clash and grind of gears,
and glimpsed lead trays sliding out of their conveyor tubes onto the
racks, trays with a dozen different new transuranic elements in them.

The tray with the oval mass of Element One-forty-four in it popped out,
as I ran forward. Instantly, that ovoid of tawny metal burst into a
shimmering glow of light that seemed to reach toward the other trays.

Zarias shouted thickly behind me. "Stop him before he brings--"

I have to choose my words carefully now. For what happened in the next
instant is still not too clear in my memory. There was a sudden feeling
of tension in the air. It was the hunch, the sixth sense, that thrills
through a radiologist sometimes just before a blow-up.

"Look _out_!" Burris yelled, and I knew from that that he felt it,
too.

And then it hit us. I'm not trying to be cryptic about all this. It's
just that it was so unearthly it's hard to describe. There was a
feeling of tingling force going through my body, and at the same moment
something jabbed into my mind. I mean that I felt an alien intrusion
battering into my thoughts.

I want to be precise. And I know that what I've just written may recall
fantasies of alien beings delicately and deftly probing into the human
mind. It wasn't like that at all. The nearest I can describe it is this
way--if my mind were a complicated watch, what had grabbed it was the
uncertain, fumbling hand of a child.

"Frank!" said Marie uncertainly, her face drained of all color. And
then she suddenly screamed it. "_Frank!_"

       *       *       *       *       *

Burris was the one who saved us then. He said afterward that he felt
that sickening, fumbling mental grasp as we did, but that his first
premonition of a blow-up had given him a certain physical momentum that
carried him through.

Anyway, he was the one who shoved us toward the door into the corridor.
I don't remember much of that moment. I dimly recall seeing Mathers,
his ascetic face blank and strange, walking stiffly toward Andersen as
the Dane stood working the chamber-controls.

I don't remember any more of it until the moment I found myself out in
the corridor with Zarias and Marie and Varez and young Carew, and heard
Burris frantically slamming the Main Physics door. The grabbling of
impossible fingers on my brain stopped then. I turned around shakily
and found young Carew being sick against the corridor wall.

"What _is_ it?" cried Marie, her eyes wide with horror. "Something
that touched our minds, that radiation--"

Zarias saved us from collapse in that moment, I think. The Greek's
black eyes were blazing with scientific passion now.

"Andersen was right--he sensed it from the first!" he cried. "It has
been born--a new and undreamed of form of life! Transuranic life!"

"You're mad!" Marie said huskily. "It can only be a queer psychological
effect of that new radiation!"

"That new radiation _is_ life!" Zarias cried fiercely. "Life of
a kind never before existing in the cosmos, because the transuranic
elements themselves never existed!" He swept on, as we stood dazed.
"What is _our_ kind of life? Is it the sulfur, phosphorus, and
carbon and other elements of our bodies? You know it is not. There's a
spark there, a chemical spark kindled long ago on the primal Earth,
that unites those inert elements into a living organism.

"The same way with It. This new radiation from Element One-forty-four
is the spark--a spark never existing before in the universe. A spark
that has grown with superhuman swiftness now, linking separated
transuranic elements together in a strange, loose physical body whose
nerves are intangible radiation! A body--and a _mind_! Only a
newborn mind yet, but powerful enough already to warp Andersen into
helping Its body grow in strength by bringing those elements together!
And now--"

Zarias didn't get a chance to finish. Carew, sick and staggering,
uttered a thin, high cry.

"It's here again!" His face was ghastly.

My own face must have been, for I felt it, too, at that moment. The
fumbling groping of tingling, intangible hands on my brain.

"The Dome!" Zarias shouted thickly. "It's strong enough to reach out of
the labs, but the Dome's walls will hold It out!"




                              CHAPTER III

                          _Clutching Fingers_


As we stumbled frantically down the corridor, my arm was around Marie.
Zarias yanked an alarm signal as he ran, and bells shrilled up and down
the corridors. Feet pounded down the lab tunnels, and startled voices
called questions.

That general alarm jammed us all at the door of the Dome for a moment.
Impossible fingers were fumbling our brains and we were driven by a
primitive, unreasoning horror.

Then the ponderous boom of the main door closing punctuated the
nightmare experience. I found myself in the little crowd by the door.
Nearly everyone in the Station was there, excited and stunned.

Doctor Cubbison appeared on the scene. "What's the reason for the
general alarm? Has there been a blow-up?"

Zarias laughed mirthlessly. "There has been a blow-up. A bad one. New
life has been born--_new_ life. Something alien to our cosmos,
something Nature never intended to exist here, but which we clever
little people brought into being. Andersen was right last night!" His
voice rasped higher. "Right now, It's in there in Main Physics lab!
What is It? It's twenty-odd chunks of transuranic elements, formed into
an organized body by linking radiation-nerves, by which it can think,
feel and _act_. It's only newly born, It doesn't know much yet,
but It knows that It wants to grow!"

Cubbison looked impatient. "Really, these dramatics--"

Zarias suddenly relaxed. "You're right. Just dramatics." He looked
around. "We're scientists. We have a problem to deal with. And we've
got to deal with it quickly before it finishes us."

"What real danger can there be?" Cubbison asked dubiously.

"You didn't feel those fingers of radiation groping at your mind?"
Marie asked him.

Burris came stumbling back from across the Dome.

"I've checked the main telltale panel!" he said hoarsely. "All the
canyons are going full tilt. Andersen must be operating them!"

Zarias spoke swiftly and coolly now. "The thing has been born and It
wants to grow. And It will grow, using Andersen and Mathers and anyone
else It can get hold of to create more transuranic elements, form them
into a bigger and bigger body, until Its radiation-mind can reach even
through the Dome's walls, even maybe to other worlds!"

I felt the full impact of horror, then. I realized that we had set the
stage for the birth of a life of radiation and radiating elements that
could not share the cosmos with our own kind of life.

"It can grow colossal, but It isn't colossal now," Zarias went on.
"It's newborn, fumbling, groping. We have to kill It before It gets
bigger."

"But how?" cried Marie. "How can you kill a thing of chemical elements
and radiation?"

The Greek set his teeth. "We've got to get back into Main Physics
lab and break up Its body by switching those elements back to their
chambers. Then we can use the emergency-charges to explode the chambers
and so destroy It."

He looked at Marie and Burris. "We'll need shields to keep that
radiation off our brains. What will hold it out best?"

"Beryllium, I think," Burris answered. "It seems to be the foot of
beryllium in the Dome's walls that's shielding it out now. But you
can't make protective helmets of foot-thick beryllium."

"We'll plate anti-rad helmets as thickly with beryllium as we can,"
Zarias retorted, "and take our chances."

Cubbison finally got a chance to speak. He spoke as fussily as though
all this were some annoying ordinary accident.

"This is all very upsetting! I shall have to report to New York at
once. In the mean-time, I leave you in charge of the problem, Doctor
Zarias."

He hurried off, and Burris laughed sourly.

"If the universe was about to come to an end, he'd get in a report to
New York."

We left Marie to watch the telltales and report to us what Andersen and
Mathers were doing in the lab. It was a hideous thing to have in our
thoughts as we worked on the helmets--the knowledge that those two were
puppets working in the uncanny Thing's grip.

The whole Station was seething with excitement, of course. Everyone
swarmed around the improvised workshop where we and the technics
sweated to cover three anti-rad helmets with extra-thick layers of
beryllium.

       *       *       *       *       *

Everyone knew there had been some kind of a blow-up in Main Physics,
but the truth was still too incredible for them. The idea of a new
birth of transuranic life, a thing of radiation and unearthly new
elements that was a sudden terrible enemy in our midst, was too much
for them yet. They thought it was just a crack-up on Andersen's part.

"They may protect us long enough to get at the chamber-controls in
there," Zarias muttered, eyeing our clumsy helmets when we finished.

Cubbison came stalking back to us as we returned to the lab corridor
entrance. His spectacles glittered worriedly at us.

"I've talked to New York and have arranged with the Commission against
any mishap here," he announced.

"What do you mean, mishap?" snapped Zarias. "We've already had one."

"I mean, if we can't cope with this transuranic Thing," Cubbison
answered fussily. "It might get all of us under control as it has
Andersen and Mathers. In that case, we'd all be working to help It
grow. The Commission is sending two rockets at once to take off all
Station personnel if the situation here becomes untenable. But in case
we're overpowered by the Thing before the rockets can get here, and
fail to maintain intelligent communication by televisor, the rockets
will drop plutonium bombs on the Station."

We stared at him. "You mean, destroy the Station?" said Burris.
"Destroy all of us?"

Cubbison nodded, frowning. "It's regrettable, but it would have to be
done if the Thing in there proves too much for us before the rockets
come. We can take no chance of Its growing beyond the Moon in power."

Zarias' face worked, and he went up to Cubbison and took his hand. "I
want to say that I am sorry, sir," the Greek said huskily.

"Sorry?" Cubbison asked annoyedly. "Sorry about what? Really, Doctor
Zarias, you are being obscure."

But we knew what Zarias meant--we all knew, for we all felt the same
shame as he did at our misjudgment of the man before us. Pompous,
vain, stuffy--yes, Cubbison was all those things. But what we hadn't
suspected was that he was the best scientist, and the best man, among
us.

We knew, now! We knew it wasn't bureaucratic intriguing that had led
the Commission to put him at the head of the Station. We knew, and were
ashamed.

I don't think Cubbison dreamed what we were thinking.

"Now, Doctor Zarias," he went on briskly, "if you'll explain how you
propose to deal with this Thing?"

"We've got to rush It before It gets stronger," Zarias said. "Burris,
Drummond and I will wear these beryllium-shielded helmets. They may
hold out the radiation well enough to let us shove the transuranic
elements back to their chambers, and thus break Its body up."

"And if the helmets don't hold?" Marie asked anxiously.

No one answered her. There wasn't any answer.

Young Carew stood ready at the lab corridor door as we put on the
helmets and adjusted them so we could see through the lead-glass
eye-slits. Then we crouched at the door like sprinters before a start.

My heart was hammering and I'm not ashamed to confess that I was
horribly afraid. Whatever It was that was in Main Physics, It wasn't
anything a man had ever faced before. And if we failed--

Carew gave me no more time to think of that. He swung the heavy door
open, we dashed through, and it slammed behind us. We ran down the
corridor to Main Physics, and a wild elation soared in me, for aside
from a tingling sensation all through me, I didn't feel anything
unusual.

"The Thing isn't attacking us!" Burris shouted, muffledly. "We'll make
it!"

Whether it was his shout or the fact that we burst into Main Physics
lab at that moment that did it, I don't know. I don't, in fact,
remember much of the next few minutes. I do recall that as we burst
into the lab, Mathers and Andersen were working in the same dazed,
mechanical way with the canyon controls.

And I recall that they had arranged the lead trays that contained
chunks or heaps of the glowing transuranic elements in a curious
circular pattern around the conveyor-rack on which the tray of
radiant Element One-forty-four still rested. And that between the
One-forty-four and the other elements, the shimmering radiation of Its
nerves pulsed and throbbed.

"One-forty-four is the brain--switch it back first!" Zarias shouted as
we plunged into the lab.

And then it hit us. It wasn't the groping fingers of radiation that had
fumbled with our brains the first time. They were stronger now, those
intangible fingers, and they weren't groping.

They grabbed our minds and held them. I was still conscious, I was
still Frank Drummond, but I didn't have a body any more. It held my
brain and body. I felt the impact of Its mind. And there was no hate or
fear or passion in it. There was only--wonder.

It had picked up us three men, had picked us up by our brains just as
a child might pick up puppies by their necks and wonderingly examine
them. And there was a strange and alien cleanness about that intangible
grasp on my brain. It was as clean and strange as starlight.

I knew we had failed, and the part of me that was still Frank Drummond
agonized in the knowledge. Then came the crash.

Burris had pitched forward so madly into the lab that he caromed into
the blank-faced Mathers, even after It gripped us.

The grip on my brain suddenly relaxed. The crash had startled It, or
had turned Its attention for a moment.

"Back out, Drummond!" Zarias screeched.

He clawed me back through the lab door and slammed it. Instantly, the
clutch of It grabbed at my brain again. But through that heavy door,
through our helmets, the clutch was not quite so strong. We could fight
it, out here in the corridor.

"Burris!" I choked, but the Greek gave me a furious shove back down the
corridor toward the Dome.

"No use! He's gone! Another second and we'll be gone too!"




                              CHAPTER IV

                          _Destructive "Toy"_


I believe we would not have got into the Dome if Carew had not heard us
coming and had the door open in time. The slam of the heavier Dome door
cut that unholy, wondering, alien grasp from our minds instantly.

I stumbled and would have fallen but for Marie's firm arm around me.
Zarias' face was livid when he took his helmet off, and I knew then
what my own must look like.

"Burris?" said Ramon Varez quietly.

"In there," croaked the Greek. "In there working for It now, with
Mathers and Andersen. Soon, maybe, all of us will be!" He got a grip on
himself and stopped that. "By heaven, no! No Thing of minerals and rays
can conquer men! We'll find a way!"

"The helmets failed, then?" said Cubbison anxiously.

"Too thin," Zarias nodded. "It'll take a foot of beryllium to protect
us. That means armor that we can wear into the lab. And we'll have to
make it fast."

The Greek was indomitable. In the hours that followed, he sweated with
the others as every working facility we had in the Dome was turned
to the all-important task of making the foot-thick armor. Beryllium
is light, but even so the suits would be heavy and massive. But we
wouldn't have to wear them far, if we succeeded.

I'd like to be able to say that I worked as hard as Zarias. I didn't. I
was too sick and shaky, for the next hours. Only shame finally made me
conquer that and plunge at the job with the others.

"I'll go in this time, and perhaps Carew and Blauner will go with me,"
Ramon Varez proposed.

Zarias choked him off. "No! Drummond and I go again, and we will kill
the Thing this time or not come out!"

I am eternally grateful to him for that. For until then, I had felt I
dared not face It again. And after that, I knew I had to.

The hours went by. Our Earth-time schedule was forgotten. We had, to
spur us on, Marie's report from the telltales that It must be growing
steadily, since the canyons were working ceaselessly to build bigger
the transuranic elements that were Its body.

The armor was finished, crude, massive and gleaming. Zarias told Varez
and me his plan.

"We will all three try to do the same thing--switch that tray of
Element One-forty-four back to its chamber, and blow the chamber.
One-forty-four is the brain-center, the life-center, of It. It's the
one vulnerable spot."

Marie interrupted with a cry that had so much horror in it that we
swung sharply around to where she stood at the telltales. She pointed
at the gauges.

"Look! Radiation is filtering into the Dome now!"

We looked. It was true. The new radiation, the radiation that was Its
nerve-force and will, was showing on the gauges. And at the same moment
we felt, faintly, the strange tingle of that radiation through our
bodies.

"If It's filtering through even the Dome's walls," Carew faltered,
"then It's so strong now--"

"So strong that our foot-thick beryllium armor is no more good than
paper!" I finished hoarsely.

We knew what had happened. Hours before, the armor would have been
effective. But in those hours, as we had worked, It had been growing
bigger and stronger. Now It was too strong for armor of any kind. Soon
It would be too strong even for the massive walls of the Dome.

"We're sunk," said Carew, and sat down heavily and put his face in his
hands.

Cubbison's thin shoulders sagged a little. "I fear the situation is
bad. Before the rockets can get here to take us off, It will control
everyone in the Dome. And when that happens--"

When that happened, when we were all mindless puppets who couldn't
answer the televisor, those rockets would carry out Cubbison's orders
and obliterate us and the Station together.

"_I_ won't quit without at least a fight!" Zarias raged. "I'm
going in there!"

       *       *       *       *       *

He started to get into his armor. But Ramon Varez caught his arm.

"Zarias, wait!" cried the Costa Rican. "There's still a chance, if
you'll let me try it! A stratagem based on psychology."

Zarias laughed mirthlessly. "Our sciences are our master passions right
to death. Thanks, Ramon. But your psychology is no good against a Thing
that doesn't live and think as we do."

"Some basic rules of psychology are the same for _any_ kind of
life!" Varez insisted. "Let me try! It'll take only a few minutes!"

He ran off across the Dome. We didn't look after him. We looked dully
and tiredly at each other.

Marie came to me and stood close beside me. What was in her eyes should
have made me feel happier, but it didn't. It agonized me to think what
we two were going to lose.

Varez came running back. With him, he had a portable ray-projector, one
of the compact boxes that can emit radiations of any type and are used
to check protective shielding.

"When we burst into the lab," he said eagerly, "I'll use this thing to
shoot quick spurts of every kind of radiation, in succession, right at
It."

"And what good will that do?" cried Zarias. "Those weak test-rays will
never harm It!"

"Give me the chance to try my plan!" pleaded Varez. "There's nothing
to be lost. I'll go in there with you, and while I use this thing on
It, you and Drummond can try to shove Element One-forty-four back to
its chamber."

The Greek shrugged heavily. "I was going in anyway. You can bring your
crazy gadget if you like."

I got into my armor without looking at Marie. I knew I wouldn't go into
the labs if I looked at her.

Varez and Zarias were in their own armor. Varez held the ray-projector
in one jointed beryllium arm. Zarias made a clumsy signal.

"All right!" his muffled voice boomed.

Carew flung the door open, and then we three were through it and
clanking down the corridor.

And Its radiation hit us in a mighty blast as we reached the door of
Main Physics. It had grown, yes--and now Its radiant will froze us in
our tracks.

I felt again that clean, alien grip on my mind and knew I'd never get
free of it. I saw Mathers and Anderson and Burris sweating over the
canyon controls that kept building It bigger, and knew I'd be sweating
with them till a plutonium bomb gave me release.

And then, unexpectedly, the grip of It on our minds incredibly relaxed.
I felt Its mental grasp shift from wonder to interest to pure delight.
Delight in the thing that Varez held, the box that was spurting an
unseen kaleidoscope of rays in an ever-changing pattern! In that, for
the moment, Its attention was wholly absorbed.

"_Now!_" yelled Zarias, and we two hurled ourselves forward across
the lab.

My hand hit the switch of Chamber N's conveyor. There was a grind of
gears, and the tray of Element One-forty-four started sliding swiftly
back from its rack into the tube.

Wonder, delight, all the emotions of Its mind changed instantly to
alarm! I felt Its thought, as a sudden wave of _hurt_ fear. And
then it was weakening, fading, as the element that was the brain-center
of Its strange life slid back out of the pattern of its unearthly body,
back to its distant, buried chamber.

[Illustration: Wonder, delight, all the emotions of Its mind changed
instantly to alarm, to hurt fear.]

"_Blow it!_" shrilled Varez, and Zarias' hand fumbled for another
switch and closed it.

There was a dull, distant roar and the whole Station shook as the
tonite explosive charge set under each chamber in case of emergencies
blew Chamber N and the Element One-forty-four in it to fragments.

And then there was just a silence in the laboratory, in which I was
conscious of Andersen and Burris lying senseless on the floor, and
Mathers standing and looking down stupidly at his hands. The tingling
force was gone, the impact of Its mind was gone, the shimmering glow of
its radiation-nerves was gone. There was nothing here but a pattern of
trays of transuranic elements, a pattern that had been a strange living
body but that was now a dead one.

       *       *       *       *       *

I felt the others crowding into the lab and helping me out of my armor.
Marie was crying as she clung to me.

"How did you do it?" Cubbison was asking Varez over and over again.

Varez looked down at the little ray-projector. "This did it. To It,
this was a delightful toy, a toy of radiation, calculated to catch
the interest of a creature whose life was radiation, just as a kitten
would catch a human child's interest. Psychology--some of its rules are
basic. For though It was transuranic, unhuman, non-normal, yet even so
it was also very young, and could be distracted by the right kind of
toy just as a young child can be. That moment of distraction gave us
our chance."

Cubbison beamed. "You've saved the Station, you three! I'll report to
New York at once. We shall be careful in future to avoid repetition of
this danger. But Transuranic Station's work can go on, thanks to your
heroism."

Zarias laughed. He laughed, but we saw now that there were tears in his
eyes and running down his cheeks.

"We are heroes, yes," he said. "We are heroes, because we have killed a
baby."

His voice lashed bitterly. "For It was just a baby, a baby trying to
live and grow up in a wholly alien and hostile world. And we did it to
death! Curse all of us for it! What are we but a lot of mucky little
apes, strutting around now because we murdered something that could
have been bigger than ourselves? It wasn't human, it wasn't of our
cosmos, but it was clean and passionless and shining, and it might have
made this whole universe one vast and wonderful mind and body! But it
wasn't human so we had to kill it--we heroes!"

He put his face in his hands and sat down blindly in a corner.

Varez looked at him. "He was too many times under Its influence," he
murmured. "He'll get over it. I--I think I know how he feels."

I thought I knew, too. That burst of wonder and delight at Varez'
"toy," that hurt, bewildered grief of the last moment--they were
shaking me, too.

Maybe Zarias was right. Maybe we had killed something that could
have been bigger and finer than humanity. But still, this isn't a
transuranic universe. It was the stranger here, not we.

And, I have thought since, maybe it was only a forerunner. Beyond our
old range of elements, the potentialities of the transuranic realms
still beckon man to create. Perhaps, someday, another It will be born
thus which will not die, but will live on after man's day is finished,
as his strange successor and son.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRANSURANIC ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
